We can use a 2-to-1 multiplexer to build a
settable storage element.
Recall that a MUX selects as its output value
the value of one of its two data inputs.
The output of the MUX serves as the state
output of the memory component.
Internally to the memory component we'll also
connect the output of the MUX to its D0 data
input.
The MUX's D1 data input will become the data
input of the memory component.
And the select line of the MUX will become
the memory component's load signal, here called
the gate.
When the gate input is LOW, the MUX's output
is looped back through MUX through the D0
data input,
forming the bi-stable positive feedback loop
discussed in the last section.
Note our circuit now has a cycle, so it no
longer qualifies as a combinational circuit.
When the gate input is HIGH, the MUX's output
is determined by the value of the D1 input,
i.e., the data input of the memory component.
To load new data into the memory component,
we set the gate input HIGH for long enough
for the Q output to become valid and stable.
Looking at the truth table, we see that when
G is 1, the Q output follows the D input.
While the G input is HIGH, any changes in
the D input will be reflected as changes in
the Q output, the timing being determined
by the tPD of the MUX.
Then we can set the gate input LOW to switch
the memory component into memory mode,
where the stable Q value is maintained indefinitely
by the positive feedback loop as shown in
the first two rows of the truth table.
Our memory device is a called a D latch, or
just a latch for short, with the schematic
symbol shown here.
When the latch's gate is HIGH, the latch is
open and information flows from the D input
to the Q output.
When the latch's gate is LOW, the latch is
closed and in "memory mode", remembering whatever
value was on the D input when the gate transitioned
from HIGH to LOW.
This is shown in the timing diagrams on the
right.
The waveforms show when a signal is stable,
i.e., a constant signal that's either LOW
or HIGH,
and when a signal is changing, shown as one
or more transitions between LOW and HIGH.
When G is HIGH, we can see Q changing to a
new stable output value no later than tPD
after D reaches a new stable value.
Our theory is that after G transitions to
a LOW value, Q will stay stable at whatever
value was on D when G made the HIGH to LOW
transition.
But, we know that in general, we can't assume
anything about the output of a combinational
device until tPD after the input transition.
The device is allowed to do whatever it wants
in the interval between tCD and tPD after
the input transition.
But how will our memory work if the 1-to-0
transition on G causes the Q output to become
invalid for a brief interval?
After all it's the value on the Q output we're
trying to remember!
We're going to have ensure that a 1-to-0 transition
on G doesn't affect the Q output.
That's why we specified a lenient MUX for
our memory component.
The truth table for a lenient MUX is shown
here.
The output of a lenient MUX remains valid
and stable even after an input transition
under any of the following three conditions.
(1) When we're loading the latch by setting
G HIGH, once the D input has been valid and
stable for tPD,
we are guaranteed that the Q output will be
stable and valid with the same value as the
D input, independently of Q's initial value.
Or (2) If both Q and D are valid and stable
for tPD, the Q output will be unaffected by
subsequent transitions on the G input.
This is the situation that will allow us to
have a 1-to-0 transition on G without contaminating
the Q output.
Or, finally, (3) if G is LOW and Q has been
stable for at least tPD, the output will be
unaffected by subsequent transitions on the
D input.
Does lenience guarantee a working latch?
Well, only if we're careful about ensuring
that signals are stable at the right times
so we can leverage the lenient behavior of
the MUX.
Here are the steps we need to follow in order
to ensure the latch will work as we want.
First, while the G input is HIGH, set the
D input to the value we wish store in the
latch.
Then, after tPD, we're guaranteed that value
will be stable and valid on the Q output.
This is condition (1) from the previous slide.
Now we wait another tPD so that the information
about the new value on the Q' input propagates
through the internal circuitry of the latch.
Now, both D *and* Q' have been stable for
at least tPD, giving us condition (2) from
the previous slide.
So if D is stable for 2*tPD, transitions on
G will not affect the Q output.
This requirement on D is called the setup
time of the latch: it's how long D must be
stable and valid before the HIGH-to-LOW transition
of G.
Now we can set G to LOW, still holding D stable
and valid.
After another tPD to allow the new G value
to propagate through the internal circuitry
of the latch, we've satisfied condition (3)
from the previous slide,
and the Q output will be unaffected by subsequent
transitions on D.
This further requirement on D's stability
is called the hold time of the latch:
it's how long after the transition on G that
D must stay stable and valid.
Together the setup and hold time requirements
are called the dynamic discipline, which must
be followed if the latch is to operate correctly.
In summary, the dynamic discipline requires
that the D input be stable and valid both
before and after a transition on G.
If our circuit is designed to obey the dynamic
discipline, we can guarantee that this memory
component will reliably store the information
on D when the gate makes a HIGH-to-LOW transition.